Practical No: 10 Modifying Virtual Machines

1: Increase the Size of a VMDK File 
1. If vSphere Web Client is not active, open your Internet Explorer Web browser, click vSphere Web Client on the favorite bar, and select vSphere Web Client - sa-vcsa-01.vclass.local. 
2. When the There is a problem with this website’s security certificate warning message appears, click Continue to this website (not recommended). 
3. Log in using administrator@vsphere.local as the user name and standard lab password. 
4. On the vSphere Web Client Home page, click VMs and Templates. 
5. In the left pane, expand the datacenter and folders. 
6. Right-click your Hot-Clone virtual machine in the inventory and select Edit Settings.
7. On the Virtual Hardware tab, record the size (GB) of Hard Disk 1._____
8. In the Hard disk 1 text box, increase the disk size by 2 GB and click OK. 
9. Right-click the Hot-Clone virtual machine and select Open Console.
10. If the Security Warning appears, click Continue to this website (not recommended). 
11. If necessary, enter the standard lab password. 
12. Configure the Hot-Clone virtual machine’s guest operating system to detect and extend the increased disk space
a. Click Start. 
b. Right-click on the Computer icon and choose Manage. 
c. In the left pane, select Disk Management. 
d. Right-click Disk Management and select Rescan Disks
e. In the lower-right pane, verify that the 2 GB unallocated disk space is discovered.
f. Right-click the C: drive and select Extend Volume. The Extend Volume wizard starts.
g. Click Next. h. On the Select Disks page, verify that Disk 0 is selected in the Selected pane and click Next
i. On the Completing the Extend Volume Wizard page, review the information and click Finish.
13. In the Disk Management window, verify that the local C: drive (Disk 0) is extended. 
14. Record the value for the total size of the C: drive. _ 
15. Compare the value with that you recorded in step 7. 
16. Close the Computer Management window. 
17. Close the virtual machine console.

2: Adjust Memory Allocation on a Virtual Machine
You add, change, or configure virtual machine memory resources or options to enhance virtual machine performance. 
1. In the inventory, right-click the Hot-Clone virtual machine and select Power > Shut Down Guest OS. NOTE If your Shut Down Guest OS option is dimmed, refresh the vSphere Web Client screen and try again. 
2. Click Yes to confirm the shutdown. 
3. After the Hot-Clone virtual machine is shut down, right-click it and select Edit Settings. 
4. On the Virtual Hardware tab, enter 2048 in the Memory text box and verify that MB is selected from the drop-down menu. 
5. Click OK. 
6. Click the virtual machine’s Summary tab and expand the view of the VM Hardware pane to verify that the memory has been increased
3: Rename a Virtual Machine in the vCenter Server Inventory
You rename an existing virtual machine in the vCenter Server Appliance inventory. 
1. Right-click the Hot-Clone virtual machine in the inventory and select Rename. 
2. In the Enter the new name text box, enter VM2-3. 
3. Click OK. 
4. Select VM2-3 virtual machine from the inventory and click the Datastores tab.
5. Right-click Shared-iSCSI-Datastore and select Browse Files
4: Add and Remove a Raw LUN on a Virtual Machine
1. In the vSphere Web Client Navigator pane, click the VMs and Templates icon. 
2. Right-click the VM2-3 virtual machine and select Edit Settings. 
3. On the Virtual Hardware tab, select RDM Disk from the New device drop-down menu and click Add. 
4. In the Select Target LUN dialog box, select 1 and click OK. 
5. Click the arrow next to New Hard disk to expand the view.
 6. In the Location drop-down menu, verify that Store with the virtual machine is selected. 
7. From the Compatibility Mode drop-down menu, select Virtual and click OK
8. Verify that the guest operating system can see the new disk
a. In the left pane, right-click the VM2-3 virtual machine and select Power > Power On.
 b. Right-click the VM2-3 virtual machine and select Open console 
c. If the Security Warning appears, click Continue to this website (not recommended). 
d. Log in as admin with the standard lab password. 
e. Click Start. 
f. Right-click the Computer icon and choose Manage. 
g. In the left pane, select Disk Management. 
h. When the Initialize Disk wizard starts, click Cancel. 
i. Verify that Disk 1 is listed.
j. Close the Computer Management window
9. Close the virtual machine console. 
10. Remove the RDM hard disk from the VM2-3 virtual machine.
a. Right-click the VM2-3 virtual machine and select Power > Shut Down Guest OS
b. Click Yes to confirm the shutdown and wait for the virtual machine to power off. 
c. Right-click the VM2-3 virtual machine and click Edit Settings
d. Under the Virtual Hardware tab, point to Hard disk 2. 
e. Click the x icon that appears at the right side of the row for Hard disk 2.
f.Select the Delete files from datastore check box and click OK.
11. Leave vSphere Web Client open for the next lab
