Practical No: 09 Using Templates and Clones

Objective: Deploy a new virtual machine from a template In this lab, you perform the following tasks: and clone a virtual machine

1. Create a Virtual Machine Template 
2. Create Customization Specifications 
3. Deploy a Virtual Machine from a Template 
4. Create a Content Library 
5. Clone a VM Template to a Template in a Content Library 
6. Deploy a Virtual Machine from a VM Template in the Content Library
7. Clone a Powered-On Virtual Machine 
1: Create a Virtual Machine Template 
You create a template to securely preserve a virtual machine configuration and easily deploy new virtual machines from the template. 
1. If vSphere Web Client is not active, open your Internet Explorer Web browser, click vSphere Web Client on the favorites bar, and select vSphere Web Client - sa-vcsa-01.vclass.local. 
2. When the There is a problem with this website’s security certificate warning message appears, click Continue to this website (not recommended). 
3. Log in using administrator@vsphere.local as the user name and the standard lab password. 
4. On the vSphere Web Client Home page, click VMs and Templates. 
5. In the inventory, expand Datacenter and LabVMs folder.
6. If the VM1-1 virtual machine is powered on, right-click the virtual machine and select Power > Shut Down Guest OS.
7. Click Yes to confirm and wait for the virtual machine to power off completely. 
8. Right-click the VM1-1 virtual machine and select Template > Convert to Template. 
9. Click Yes to confirm the conversion. 
10. Right-click the VM1-1 virtual machine template and select Move To. 1
1. Select VM Folders > Templates folder and click OK. 
12. Expand the Templates folder, right-click the VM1-1 virtual machine template, and select Rename. 13. Enter VM-Template and click OK.

2: Create Customization Specifications
1. Go to the vSphere Web Client Home page. 
2. In the Navigator pane, select Policies and Profiles. 
3. Under Policies and Profiles, click Customization Specification Manager and click the Create a new specification icon. The New VM Guest Customization Spec wizard appears. 
4. On the Specify Properties page, verify that Windows is selected from the Target VM Operating System drop-down menu. 
5. In the Customization Spec Name text box, enter VM-CustomSpec and click Next. 
6. On the Set Registration Information page, enter VMware Student in the Name text box and enter VMware in the Organization text box. 
7. Click Next. 
8. On the Set Computer Name page, click Use the virtual machine name and click Next.
9. On the Enter Windows License page, leave the product key text box blank, leave other settings at their defaults, and click Next. 
10. On the Set Administrator Password page, enter the standard lab password and confirm it. 
11. On the Time Zone page, select the (GMT-08:00) Pacific Time (US & Canada) time zone from the Time Zone drop-down menu and click Next. 
12. On the Run Once page, click Next. 
13. On the Configure Network page, verify that Use standard network settings for the guest operating system, including enabling DHCP on all network interfaces is clicked and click Next. 
14. On the Set Workgroup or Domain page, verify that Workgroup is clicked and that the text box shows WORKGROUP. 
15. Click Next. 
16. On the Set Operating System Options page, verify that the Generate New Security ID (SID) check box is selected and click Next. 
17. On the Ready to complete page, review the information and click Finish. 
18. In the Customization Specification Manager pane, verify that VM-CustomSpec is listed.

3: Deploy a Virtual Machine from a Template 
Using templates, you rapidly deploy and provision new virtual machines and easily customize the guest operating systems. 
1. On the vSphere Web Client Home page, click VMs and Templates and expand the view of the inventory. 
2. In the left pane, expand the data center and folders until all the virtual machines are visible. 
3. Right-click VM-Template and select New VM from this Template. The Deploy From Template wizard starts. 
4. On the Select a name and folder page, enter VM1-2. 
5. In the Select a location for the virtual machine pane, expand the inventory tree, select the LabVMs folder, and click Next. 
6. On the Select a compute resource page, expand the Lab Servers folder and select sa-esxi01.vclass.local. The Compatibility pane displays the Compatibility checks succeeded message. 
7. Click Next.
8. On the Select storage page, select Shared-iSCSI-Datastore from the list. The Compatibility pane displays the Compatibility checks succeeded message. 
9. Click Next. 
10. On the Select clone options page, select the Customize the operating system and the Power on virtual machine after creation check boxes and click Next. 
11. On the Customize guest OS page, select VM-CustomSpec and click Next. 
12. On the Ready to complete page, review the information and click Finish. 
13. Repeat steps 3 through 12 to create another virtual machine on your second host named sa-esxi-02.vclass.local and name it VM2-2.
14. In the Recent Tasks pane, monitor the progress of the two template deployment tasks and wait for their completion. 
15. Open a console for each of the newly created virtual machines. 
a. In the left pane of vSphere Web Client, right-click the virtual machine and select Open Console. When the virtual machine console opens, you might see the Windows setup process continuing. It automatically reboots a few times to complete the process. 
b. Log in as admin with the standard lab password.
c. When the Set Network Location window opens, click Work network
d.Click Close
e.Verify that VMware Tools is installed by navigating to the Windows system tray at the lower-right corner to show hidden icons, and double-click the VMware Tools icon.
f.Ensure that VMware Tools for Windows is running.
g. Close the virtual machine console. 
16. In vSphere Web Client, select each virtual machines individually in the Navigator pane, and click the Refresh icon in order for the Summary tab data to be updated.

4: Create a Content Library
1. Navigate to the vSphere Web Client Home page. 
2. In the Navigator pane, click Content Libraries. 
3. In the center pane, click the Create a new content library icon under the Objects tab. 
4. On the Name and location page, enter VM_Library in the Name text box and click Next
5. In the Configure content library page, select Local content library, select the Publish externally check box, and click Next. 
6. In the Add storage page, select Select a datastore and select Shared-iSCSI-Datastore and click Next. 
7. On the Ready to complete page, review the information and click Finish. 
8. Wait for this task to finish before you go to the next task.

5: Clone a VM Template to a Template in a Content Library 
You clone virtual machines or VM templates from the vCenter Server inventory to templates in the content library and use them later to provision virtual machines on a cluster or a host. You can also clone a virtual machine or VM template to update an existing template in the library. 
1. Navigate to the vSphere Web Client Home page, and click VMs and Templates. 
2. Expand the view of the data center and all folders. 
3. Right-click VM-Template and select Clone to Library.
 4. For Clone as, verify that New template is selected. 
5. Under the Filter tab, click VM_Library. 
6. In the template name text box, enter VM-TemplateLib. 
7. Click OK and wait for the task to finish before you go to the next task. 
This process takes about five minutes.
6: Deploy a Virtual Machine from a VM Template in the Content Library 
You use a VM template from a content library to deploy a virtual machine to a host or a cluster in your vSphere inventory. You can also apply a customization specification to the virtual machine. 
1. Navigate to the vSphere Web Client Home page and click Content Libraries. 
2. In the navigator pane, select VM_Library. 
3. Click the Templates tab. 
4. Right-click VM-TemplateLib and select New VM from This Template. 
5. On the Select name and location page, enter VM-FromLib in the Name text box. 
6. Ensure that the Browse tab is clicked and expand the view of Datacenter. 
7. Select the LabVMs folder. 
8. Select the Customize VM Options - Customize the operation system check box and click Next
9. On the Customize guest OS page, select VM-CustomSpec and click Next. 
10. On the Select a resource page, expand the Lab Servers folder, select sa-esxi-02.vclass.local host, and click Next. 
11. On the Review details page, verify the template details and click Next. 
12. On the Select storage page, select Thin Provision from the Select virtual disk format dropdown menu. 
13. Under Datastores tab in the Filter tab, ensure that Local02-2 is clicked.
14. Click Next. 
15. On the Select networks page, ensure that Production appears in the Destination Network field and click Next. 
16. On the Ready to complete page, review the information and click Finish. 
17. In the Recent Tasks pane, monitor the progress of the template deployment task and wait for completion. This task takes about five minutes. 
18. In vSphere Web Client, click the Home icon and select VMs and Templates. 19. In the left pane, right-click VM-FromLib and select Power > Power On.
20. Open a console for the VM-FromLib virtual machine
a. In the left pane of vSphere Web Client, right-click the VM-FromLib virtual machine and select Open Console. When the virtual machine console opens, you might see the Windows setup process continuing. It automatically reboots a few times to complete the process.
 b. Log in as admin with the standard lab password. 
c. When the Set Network Location window opens, click Work network. 
d. Click Close. 
e. Verify that VMware Tools is installed by navigating to the Windows system tray at the lower-right corner to show hidden icons and double-click the VMware Tools icon. 
f. Verify that VMware Tools for Windows is running.
21. Close the virtual machine console. 
22. Navigate to the vSphere Web Client Home page. 
23. Click Content Libraries. 
24. Right-click the VM_Library content library in the Navigator pane and select Delete.
25. In the Delete library confirmation dialog box, click Yes.
7: Clone a Powered-On Virtual Machine
1. On the vSphere Web Client Home page, click VMs and Templates. 
2. In the inventory, expand the Datacenter and LabVMs folders. 
3. If the VM2-1 virtual machine is not powered on, right-click the virtual machine and select Power > Power on. 
4. Right-click the VM2-1 virtual machine and select Clone > Clone to Virtual Machine. The Clone Existing Virtual Machine wizard starts. 
5. On the Select a name and folder page, enter Hot-Clone in the Enter a name for the virtual machine text box.
 6. For the Select a location for the virtual machine setting, expand Datacenter and select LabVMs. 
7. Click Next.
8. On the Select a compute resource page, select Datacenter > Lab Servers > sa-esxi02.vclass.local and click Next. 
9. On the Select storage page, select Shared-iSCSI-Datastore and click Next. 
10. On the Select clone options page, select the Customize the operating system and the Power on virtual machine after creation check boxes. 
11. Click Next. 
12. On the Customize guest OS page, select VM-CustomSpec and click Next. 
13. On the Ready to complete page, review the information and click Finish. 
14. Monitor the progress of the task in the Recent Tasks pane.
15. Open a console for the Hot-Clone virtual machine.
a. In the left pane of vSphere Web Client, right-click the Hot-Clone virtual machine and select Open Console. When the virtual machine console opens, you might see the Windows setup process continuing. It automatically reboots a few times to complete the process. 	
b. Log in as admin with the standard lab password. 
c. Wait until the VM desktop and the Set Network Location page appear. d. When the Set Network Location window opens, click Work network. 
e. Click Close.
f. Verify that VMware Tools is installed by navigating to the Windows system tray at the lower-right corner to show hidden icons and double-click the VMware Tools icon. 
g. Verify that VMware Tools for Windows is running.
16. Close the virtual machine console. 
17. Leave vSphere Web Client open for the next lab
